The consortium of the Guardian, the Telegraph and YouTube offering to act as a platform for an online election debate between the party leaders has suggested moving forward the date of its event to accommodate the wishes of David Cameron.

In a letter to party leaders, the media organisations say they are now offering to move forward the date of its proposed debate by a few days to 26 March 26 or 27 March – before the start of the so-called short campaign – again inviting the five main UK-wide parties. This would mean including the leaders of the Conservative party, Labour, Liberal Democrats, Ukip and the Green party. The nationalist parties from Scotland and Wales would be excluded, as well as the Democratic Unionists.

In their letter executives from the consortium write: “We note that the prime minister has said he is willing to take part in a debate in the week beginning 23 March and that the leader of the opposition is prepared to debate ‘any time, any place, anywhere’. The consortium had initially proposed a date of around 30 March, and an earlier date might remove one stumbling block to the debates occurring.

“We also note that the impasse in negotiations with the broadcasters means that meaningful television debates now look unlikely to take place,” the consortium writes.

The prime minister has insisted he will take part in only one debate involving seven parties, including the nationalist parties, but the broadcasters say they are pressing ahead with their plans to stage three debates including a head-to-head between Ed Miliband and Cameron. It is not clear how these debates could be staged within the broadcasting laws on balance if Cameron declines to attend.

In a further complication, the DUP has threatened legal action if they continue to be excluded, making the chances of any debate taking place increasingly slim. The Number 10 director of communications, Craig Oliver, has said Cameron’s offer to attend only one debate is his “final offer”, and there has been no sign of any flexibility in Cameron’s subsequent remarks.

But the digital consortium is hoping in the wake of the impasse to keep its offer in play. They write: “We can confirm that the digital debate would be available live, and after the event, for any and all TV networks to broadcast in addition to being on YouTube platforms.”

They argue: “Participation in the digital debate holds many benefits over and above the leaders’ debates held before the last general election. At this year’s general election, the internet will be the main source of news for the majority of UK voters, especially amongst those aged under 44.

“The Guardian, the Telegraph and YouTube will collectively provide the best possible online platform for such a debate, with direct connections to other election resources and party websites. Together, the partners provide scale and balance, backed by leading technical expertise and world-class political journalism.”

Parties such as Labour have not rejected the digital consortium proposal but have been anxious it does not become a way out for Cameron to avoid terrestrial debates.

It is widely believed Cameron has been told he has little to gain, and much potentially to lose from a head to head debate with Miliband since he is already so far ahead on leadership qualities in opinion polls.